---
layout: post
title: "chad vim "
date: 2024-03-17 03:2:43 +0530
categories: linux vim 
tags: linux , commands
---
# THE NEOVIM EDITOR

vim is an awesome editor. fast, lightweight and mouse freeee <br>
vim motion is the way to use vim like the keybinding and all  so we will cover all that here. <br>

# VIM MODES
vim has 4 Modes <br>
to change one mode from other, you need to escape from the current mode by pressing esc key and then the key for the mode you want to change. 
<br>
for example if you are in insert mode and you want to go into visual mode. first press esc to get out of visual mode then v for visual mode.
<br>
1. normal mode  - the first mode when you enter into any file.
2. insert mode - where you can write anything. press i for insert mode.
3. visual mode - where you get a visual block for varius functions, press v for visual mode.
4. command mode - where you can type commands. press : for this.

# how to move in vim 
first the basic movements of vim are **h,j,k,l** 
H - left  
J - down
K - up
L - right

you can use number with these keys to go that way that many times like 16h with go 16times left or 14j would go 14times down so pretty fast yk

### word by word 
W - forward
B - backward 

## delete
dd - delete the whole line

dd can be combined with numbers and w, b

u - undo

ctrl +r - redo

## copy
go into visual mode and simply hjkl to select your stuffs

y - yank (copy)

p - paste 

shift + p - new line paste

delete and yank both goes in same buffer so you paste what you yank or delete

_ - goes to begening of the line

$ - to the last of line


#### tips tricks shits 

x - delete one word 

ddp - swap upper and lower line 

di" - delete inside ""

yi" - copy inside quote

dG - delete everything 

dgg - delete everything

ctrl + w - delete prev word in insert mode 

ctrl + u - delete everything from cursor to back

ctrl + o - run normal mode command in insert for for once

= - indent or reindent , can be combined with gg goes

n - go to next instance of a word in find 

shift + n - just backward

%s/what-to-change/change into what/g   - multiple find and replace

s/what-to-change/change into what/g   - multiple find and replace in that line 

**here / is delimeter which can be changed if u wanna edit /**


